
Intro
-----

Email systems consits of computer servers that process and store message on behalf of the user. 
Users connect to email infrastructure to send and receive email. 
When someone sends an email, the message is transferred from their computer to the server associate with the domain. 
The message can pass through a number of intermeditary servers along the way. 


Scenario
--------

=> A user (Alice) sends an email message and connects to a smtp server as configured in her Mail User Agent (MUA)
=> On the server a Mail Transfer Agent (MTA) looks at the recipient address and look up the domian part of the address to determine the destination.
=> After querying a DNS server for the Mail eXchanger(MX) for the recipient's domain name, the server sends the message using SMTP protocol. 
=> The receiving server will store the message and make it available to recipient who can access via web, POP, or IMAP


Email Server
------------

Email servers are responsible for receiving, storing, forwarding and delivering messages. 
Messages are exchanged between servers using smtp protocol among various Mail Transfer Agent (MTA).

There are 3 main type of email servers:
1) SMTP Server 
2) POP Server
3) IMAP Server

SMTP Server can refer to either a physical server or an application server. 
These are called MTA (Mail Transfer Agent).
MTA receives and delivers mail to and from other email servers and users. 

POP Server is a peice a software that gives an email user access to email stored in the server. 
The user can download the message using MUA (Mail User Agent). 

IMAP like like POP but providers full access to all the folders the user has created on the server. 
The user can synchronize all the folders and messages on all the server with the data stored locally using a MUA with IMAP capabilities. 


Email Client (MUA) 
-------------------

A user can access email messages stored on an email server using an email client. 
Email client connects to email server via POP to download messages from a folder. 
More advance IMAP protocol can be used to synchronize all messages in the folders that exist on the server. 
When the user sends a message, the client connects to the server. 


Webmail
-------

A webmail is a web based email service that is accessible in a web browser. 
Most email services offer web interfaces to email store on the server. 


Content
-------

In early days email only contained plain text ASCII format. 
Email these days has evolved to support HTML and other types of content. 
Today, email messages are usually MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension) encoded. 
This allows email to support text in various character sets, attached files, and miltimedia content etc. 

